# 6. Keys

# 

What are keys? A database key is a column or group of columns in a table that uniquely identifies a row in a table.
Let’s return to our example of the magazine subscriptions. Recall that we had three tables:  <span style="font-family: .AppleSystemUIFontMonospaced-Regular; font-size: 12.0;text-align: left;">
     orders
 </span>,  <span style="font-family: .AppleSystemUIFontMonospaced-Regular; font-size: 12.0;text-align: left;">
     subscriptions
 </span>, and  <span style="font-family: .AppleSystemUIFontMonospaced-Regular; font-size: 12.0;text-align: left;">
     customers
 </span>.
Each of these tables has a column that uniquely identifies each row of that table:
* order_id for orders
* subscription_id for subscriptions
* customer_id for customers
These special columns are called <u>**[primary keys](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/sql/primary-keys?page_ref=catalog)**</u>.
Primary keys have a few requirements:
* None of the values can be NULL.
* Each value must be unique (i.e., you can’t have two customers with the same customer_id in the customers table).
* A table cannot have more than one primary key column.
When the primary key for one table appears in a different table, it is called a <u>**[foreign key](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/sql/primary-keys?page_ref=catalog)**</u>.

## Create a primary key
To designate a primary key in a table, type the PRIMARY KEY keyword in all caps next to the selected column when creating a table. For example, the following code designates the id column as the primary key for the recipe table.

```
CREATE TABLE recipe (
  id integer PRIMARY KEY,
  name varchar(20),
  ...
);

```


## **Key Validation**
As part of an international SQL standard, the <u>[information schema](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/9.1/information-schema.html)</u> is a database containing meta information about objects in the database including tables, columns and constraints. This schema provides users with read-only views of many topics of interest.
For example, to determine if a column has been designated correctly as a primary key, we can query a special view, key_column_usage, generated from this database. This view identifies all columns in the current database that are restricted by some constraint such as primary key or foreign key.

```
SELECT
  constraint_name, table_name, column_name
FROM
  information_schema.key_column_usage
WHERE
  table_name = 'recipe';

```

Will shows

```
 constraint_name | table_name | column_name 
-----------------+------------+-------------
 recipe_pkey     | recipe     | id
(1 row)

```

The constraint_name value, such as recipe_pkey, is generated by default to begin with a table name followed by the type of constraint. pkey refers to a primary key constraint, while fkey refers to a foreign key constraint.

## **Composite Primary Key**
Sometimes, none of the columns in a table can uniquely identify a record. When this happens, we can designate multiple columns in a table to serve as the primary key, also known as a composite primary key.
To designate multiple columns as a composite primary key, use this syntax:

```
PRIMARY KEY (column_one, column_two)

```

For example, if we were to designate both recipe_id and ingredient_id as the composite primary key for the popular_recipes table, we would write the CREATE TABLE statement for popular_recipes as follows.

```
CREATE TABLE popular_recipes (
  recipe_id varchar(20),
  ingredient_id varchar(20),
  downloaded integer,
  PRIMARY KEY (recipe_id, ingredient_id)
);

```


## **Foreign Key**
To maintain data integrity and ensure that we can join tables together correctly, we can use another type of key called a foreign key. A foreign key is a key that references a column in another table.
To designate a foreign key on a single column in PostgreSQL, we use the REFERENCES keyword:

```
CREATE TABLE person (
  id integer PRIMARY KEY,
  name varchar(20),
  age integer
);

CREATE TABLE email (
  email varchar(20) PRIMARY KEY,
  person_id integer REFERENCES person(id),
  storage integer,
  price money
);

```

The key is saved as follows

```
constraint_name        | table_name | column_name 
-----------------------+------------+-------------
email_person_id_fkey   | email      | person_id
(1 row)

```


We could use the following query to return a table of names and associated emails:

```
SELECT person.name AS name, email.email AS email
FROM person, email
WHERE person.id = email.person_id;

```





























